Welcome to the fourth episode of the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to control technology.
I'm Matthias Kirschner, I'm the President of the Free Software Foundation Europe and
I'm doing this podcast with Bonnie Merring, our current intern.
Hello, our guest for today is Carmen Bianca Baca.
Carmen was an intern at the FSFE, a volunteer and freelancer.
Besides the FSFE, she also volunteers for GNOME and Fedora and translates the user interface
into Esperanto.
Today we have invited Carmen, as she worked together with Max Mehl on the Reuse Initiative.
The Reuse Initiative is developed by the FSFE.
It aims at making license information better understandable by humans as well as machines.
So, welcome Carmen.
Thank you.
How did you get involved in Free Software Carmen?
I got involved in Free Software through Linux basically.
I was bored out of my mind one day and I figured let's do something weird, let's install
Linux.
So I started using Linux, I really liked it and through Linux or GNU-Slasher Linux, the
philosophy of Free Software started seeping through and I started really agreeing with
that and really being like excited about that.
And how did you get started with the FSFE then?
I was reading up on Free Software, like just generally doing some reading up.
I got on the website of the FSFE and the very first news article is we're looking
for interns and I was looking for an internship at the time.
So it was very, I'll just send an email immediately and I got email back like within a couple
of hours I believe and I was like, yeah, sure, come over and I was like, what?
This is the easiest internship ever.
Well, so and then you started with your internship and during the internship you got involved
in our reuse initiative.
Yes, that wasn't the goal though.
I was initially going to work on some kind of backend software but that didn't really
work out because of some communication problems.
So I had nothing to do in the office and I said, oh, there's this reuse thing and it's
really cool but there's no tool for it.
So what if I just, you know, what have I made that and I made that and then well, it was
actually really good and I kept working on that.
Going one step bare can you quickly explain what reuse is and what problem it wants to fix?
Reuse is a project that aims to solve the problem of licensing which is very broad but very
specifically it wants to make it so that if you have a project with which consists of
many files that you know which exact licenses every single file is under where currently
there is a lot of ambiguity and a lot of projects.
Okay, so going back a step there when we were talking at the beginning with people working
in the compliance area, we also had workshops and then we asked people like, what do you
have to keep in mind to make sure that the software is really compliant and then we had
many, many bullet points there of things you should consider but our goal was always
that reuse should be something for people who don't have a lot of time.
So we asked them like, what is the most important of those points for you?
And in the end, I didn't have that many sticky notes with me where people can vote for
the points so everybody just got three and could put them there and in the end we had three
points which were the real winners of that and people realized, oh yeah, if people do
those three things, the other parts are not that problematic anymore.
So can you explain what are those three points we came up with in the end?
Yes, they've changed a little bit since the third iteration of reuse.
Very briefly, the first step is to choose your license and to provide it verbatim to the
user.
So if you use a license, you say you use the GPL, you have to actually include it with
your software.
Then you add copyright and licensing information to every single file in your project, just
a tiny little commentator that says who the copyright holder is and what licenses this
file is available under.
And as a third option, you check this, you confirm whether you did it right and towards
that end I wrote a very handy little tool that just checks everything and if it works
you get a smiley face at the end.
Do they really get a smiley face?
You really got a smiley face.
Okay, I have a question here because you mentioned the GPL, could you briefly explain to
me what a license actually covers?
Because there are so many differences between licenses, could you just give us an overview.
The most important thing towards understanding licenses is copyright.
If you don't understand copyright, you cannot understand licenses and copyright very briefly
is if I create something like a document, I have copyright over that, so I can, I make
it, I show it to people and it's fine, but you can't then copy it and show to other people
without my permission.
That's just a right, a copyright that I have.
And a license is a way of saying, okay, I want you to have this, but I also want you
to be able to share it afterwards.
And the license determines the terms under which you are allowed to use this.
So there are free software licenses and non-free licenses, what exactly do the difference
between them?
The difference between those licenses is whether they grant you certain rights.
So a free program, a free license will always give you the right to use the program, study
the program, share the program and improve the program.
If any of those rights are missing for the user, then it is not a free program or a non-free
license if you will.
So any license that doesn't give those freedoms is a non-free license.
Add a different free licenses.
Yes, there are different free licenses.
There are the very basic ones that just cover the four freedoms, such as MIT, BSD, Aviva
Apache as well.
And there are slightly more complicated copy-lapped licenses.
And what they do is you get the source code, you get all the freedoms and it's really cool
and you start hacking on it yourself and modifying it a little bit.
And you give it to someone else and then the condition of giving it to someone else is
that they must also have the four freedoms again.
So what does this offer license covers?
Like, does it cover the code or do it read me?
Technically, it covers everything that is copyrightable.
That's kind of an issue we're running into sometimes with reviews like our configuration
files copyrightable.
But technically, something that is copyrightable is anything that has some kind of usually
artistic effort put behind it, but like efforts.
Like, someone else couldn't have made this up.
This is your personal expression, which is a bit weird when it comes to software, but
that's what we've got.
So if I have a program, yes, and I have many files there, because usually programs exist
with many files.
What do you need to license then, like, do it just have to make one file where the license
is?
That's how many people used to do it, but with reuse we're trying to change that and
just put a tiny little comment header inside of every single file in the project, which
is a lot of files, that's we find the best way to do it.
And it's also why the name of the project is reuse, because very often, I'll find a
very handy file on the internet, and I'll just take it like, oh, that's a good code.
I'll take it.
I'll put it in my own projects.
But the problem you find is that that file that I just took doesn't have a nice header
that says who the copyright holder is and what the license is.
And I have to search for myself who is the copyright holder.
What license is it on it?
And usually it's like somewhere in the read me, but maybe I made a mistake.
Maybe I made a mistake and I put it in my projects and I say, oh, this is copyright
so and so.
This is under the MIT license.
And then someone else finds my version and they copy that onwards, but they also copy
my mistake in when I initially detected the copyright.
And to fix all of that, we just say, well, just put it in the file.
You can't go wrong there.
I mean, when you explain it, I think it's clear for many that that's an issue for companies
or for companies in general because they include a lot of software in their products.
Like when you look at some of the big, big players, they build a car, they build a train,
they build other larger devices and they have many, many lines of code in there, many
different components.
And they have to make sure that it's all compliant with the different licenses from GPL
to Apache to other licenses.
So they also invest a lot of time into checking all the licensing there because else if they
are sued, it's a problem for their company.
But why should I as an individual developer, when I write code in my spare time, why should
I care about following the rules of reuse and provocatively ask, make the life of the
company's easier?
Yes, that is a bit of a problem.
And it's hard to definitively say, yeah, definitely.
It's just like the real, real advantage, but the advantage I'd say is if you write code
in your spare time, usually it's a little bit of a labor of love, at least a little bit.
And you want people to actually use it, like that's the joy of software you wrote it and
you see other people using it and it's just, that's great.
And you make it so much easier for other people to be able to use your software if you license
it correctly because some people will not touch a piece of software if it is not correctly
licensed, they just won't touch it.
Okay, that's one of the problems probably that occur with licensing and you already
mentioned another one that maybe you don't know under which license something is and you
make a mistake.
What other problems occur with licensing?
A problem I would have run into if I didn't use reuse in my own programs is I have a piece
of code and it's all under the GPL, GPL 3 or later.
And that's great, but I found a piece of code that was under the Apache 2 license and
it was really good code and I wanted it in my project and that is totally possible, like
I can put Apache code inside of my GPL project.
The problem was I would have had to edit the readme file that says, oh, this project is
under GPL, I would have had to edit that to say, oh, and it's also under Apache.
Now in the end, I did do that, but let's say I also somewhere else said, oh, this is
just a GPL project and like every or say, this is a GPL project and that wouldn't be true
anymore because there is a bit of Apache code in there and by including the comment header
inside of the file that says, oh, this is an Apache file, it is absolutely clear that
this software is also licensed under the Apache license.
So would you say that nowadays licenses are way more mixed than they were in the past?
Yes, definitely, like you can find good code anywhere, like a lot of developers find code
on Stack Overflow and that's good, like there is a little good example code on Stack Overflow
and some of it is quite long, but all the stuff that you find on Stack Overflow is technically
licensed under a creative commons license, I believe.
And it's really good if you actually like make sure like, oh, this is creative commons
code, by the way.
Let's re-use help with licensing.
Reuse helps with licensing by making it really, really easy, like a lot of the other resources
you'll find is like, oh, put the license in the copying file and then like edit, you
read me a little bit and also go to the setup.py file and make sure it's right, it's all
really complicated.
Whereas reuse, we have three steps and if you just follow the steps, it's like the
most easy thing in the world and especially when you get to step three, you can verify
whether you did it correctly and then it just says, yeah, you did it correctly and it's
all good.
So you think that the recommendations there are also for people who usually say, I don't
care much about licensing, I just put my code somewhere without caring about the license
and that's fine with me, I don't want to care about the rest.
Yeah, it's like, it's fun if you don't care about the license, like if you just want
people to use it, just put it on a permissive license, that's cool, but you do have to actually
like care at least a little bit to at least put the headers there and that's all the
efforts that is needed of you.
One of the problems is that when people say, well, I don't care all about licensing and
I just put the code there that it's under no license, so that means it's not free software.
So you're not allowed to use that, you share and improve the software there.
So at one point, you have to define what license you're using.
Yes, and technically there is a very, very simple way to do that in reuse.
I wouldn't recommend it, but you can like edit like a tiny file and just say, oh, everything
is under GPL and then you're also covered.
It's a bit of a hack, you can do it, I wouldn't recommend it, but it's totally possible.
How is reuse at the moment maintained and developed?
It has currently maintained, co-maintained by me and Max Mail.
I do it in my volunteer time, Max chooses his paid time, I imagine, by the FTAV.
And we've got a bit of a cooperation going on, but it is a little bit of a volunteer project,
like everything concerning reuse is available or on the internet, currently on GitHub,
hopefully soon we'll move off of that.
And you can just drop in and say, oh, I'd like to change this.
Is it possible or even do poor requests?
I really like poor requests.
One of the next steps is to move it away from GitHub and what are the other next steps for reuse?
Moving away from GitHub is kind of a big one, because GitHub is not free software.
And it is a little bit difficult when you're the free software
finished in Europe and you're on GitHub, but for getting reuse started,
it was very good to collaborate with a lot of people who were on GitHub.
That helped a lot, moving off of GitHub is a little bit difficult,
because we do have our own GitHub instance, GitHub year I believe,
but it's not trivial for other people to create an account there,
or I don't know if anything changed recently, but it wasn't easy in the past.
So that would be like the larger steps and then your future to move it away.
Are there any other things you want to do with reuse in the future?
There are a lot of things that I'd like to generally improve,
but I think the foundation for use has very much been settled.
There are some really cool suggestions with regard to how we can alter the spec a little bit,
but the spec is always very difficult to change the specification,
because then you upset people and they have to change their stuff again.
So probably not going to do that for a while, but the tool,
like there's a lot of stuff I could add.
In a previous version, I added a way to automatically add headers to files,
though you can just say, oh, I've got all these files,
just add headers to them for me, please.
I don't want to do that myself.
That's really busy work. I don't want to care.
And there are a lot of improvements to me made there.
Currently, it only supports 20 file types,
and you have to kind of muck about a little bit if you want to do other file types.
Ideally, very soon, I'd like to have a mechanism
where you don't even need, like, specify your own name in the command line.
Just say, oh, you already know my name.
It's in my Gitconfig. Just take that and it's fine.
That sounds easy.
Yeah, it's really easy.
What are the biggest hurdles for making software reuse compliant?
Because it sounds really easy, and now I'm sure a lot of people want to use it.
So what do they need to do to be able to use it?
Getting started for very big projects is usually a bit of a hurdle.
Because very big projects, like they have had a lot of contributors,
they aren't sure which licenses all of those contributions were under.
You mean projects like the Linux kernel?
Yes, project like Linux kernel.
I know very famously Firefox ones tried to re-license their code,
and they had to rewrite bits because they couldn't determine the licenses
under which that was licensed, or they couldn't contact the author
to give them permission to re-license their code.
So they had to literally rewrite bits of code
to be able to be compliant with their own license.
But yeah, that is the biggest hurdle.
Like finding the actual copyright holders and licenses of every single file.
And there is going to be a lot of busy work there,
and probably you might want to find like a legal expert for that.
But once you've got that settled, it's really easy.
For all the other contributors, just keep it going.
You can add reuse to your continuous integration.
So every commit you do, it will just be tested.
And if there's something wrong, a red button will show up and say,
over the way, fix reuse, please.
So you have to smite first and you have a red button that shows up
if something is wrong and tells them what to do to fix it?
Yes, that's exactly it.
Technically, you get a side face if it fails.
And now I mean, with reuse, we thought about what are good recommendations.
We created tools for which help you to make your software reuse compliant.
Now, I mean, for me, the big step is that people actually use those recommendations
so that we then, afterwards, have the benefits where almost everybody agreed
we talked to that those steps are very important steps.
So where are we there?
Who's already using it?
I know that the Linux foundation is using a variety of reuse.
Basically, we got in contact with the Linux people very early on
in the development of reuse and they took some of that,
they added some of their own and they went ahead and did all of that.
So you find almost every single file in the Linux kernel
now has a kind of reuse compliant header and that's really cool.
We also have our project called Next Generation Internet
where we are involved and also help projects which are accepted there
to check if their software is compliant.
And we also use the reuse tools there.
So two of our staffers, Gabriel and Lukas are working on that
and they're the feedback.
It's quite mixed till now.
I mean, we have people, they're very happy that you informed them about that
and they just implemented it and all's fine.
They have of course also some others who, for them,
like licensing is more hurdle and they might already have some code
and you explain that well then it's also some more effort
to implement it there.
When you talk with people about reuse till now,
what was the feedback you received about it?
Well, specifically the NGIO, I've noticed a lot of stuff coming from there.
Like they come to the reuse tool and they write issues like,
oh, this is broken and I'll fix it and it's fine.
But you definitely notice some people who are really, really like collaborative
and they want to help fix the tool and you know,
they've got all cool sort of ideas and they like really get involved.
But you also have other people who are like,
oh, I just want it to work.
Can I just do this and after all, no, you can't really do that.
I mean, you could maybe, but it's a little bit hard.
As for the other comments I've received about reuse,
it's mostly been really positive.
Like, oh yeah, I've never really thought about licensing much
and I don't really know how to do it.
But if it's really that easy, then I might.
So a lot of positive feedback.
Just a little positive feedback and then some negative feedback
about people who just really, really don't want to bother with licensing.
You've worked on reuse during your internship.
What was the motivation for you to continue working on that afterwards?
This is an obligation that I feel that a lot of programmers have.
Like, they've started a project that's kind of like their baby
and they feel like a responsibility towards keeping maintaining it.
And that's what I did and it wasn't a lot of time and I really like the people
in the efforts of years well and I really like free software.
So I just kind of stuck around and it's been really good.
I've been to Barcelona to talk about what licensing,
well, I'm here currently in Bosano to also talk about licensing.
I'll have a talk later about reuse.
Okay, one last question regarding reuse.
And the virtual license is the reuse tool itself.
The reuse tool itself is on the GPL three or later
and a couple of other licenses.
It's also under the Creative Commons license
for some of the documentation.
It's under the Creative Commons zero license
for some of the configuration files and it's under the Apache license
for that really good bit of code that I stole.
Well, not stole but borrowed.
Reused. Reused.
Okay, then the last question I have, as you know,
on February 14th we are always celebrating the I love free software day
because during the year we complain a lot.
People complain about bugs in the reuse,
linter tool, people complain about problems with the documentation
and how you can further improve it.
They might complain that, well, it's still too complicated
and we try to fix that but people often forget to say thank you
and we ourselves also have to remind ourselves to say thank you
to all the people whose code we reuse in our tools
and so on 14th of February we encourage people to say thank you
and use it as a one-day reminder but of course you can also say thank you
all the rest of the year when we think about it like we do now.
So my question would be which program or which developer would you like to thank?
In the spirit of the question I think I'd like to thank the GNOME programmers
I know I can't really do a little bit to GNOME myself
mostly translations, I haven't done a lot of coding for GNOME
but I really, really like the GNOME projects.
They make my life a lot easier just having a very nice tidy interface
and they don't get a lot of love sometimes.
There's a lot of criticism towards GNOME and I'm sure some of it's valid
but I'd like to make sure that they also feel loved in a way
for all the amazing work they do.
Okay thank you very much Carmen.
Thank you so much.
Thank you for having me.
This was the Software Freedom Podcast.
If you liked this episode please recommend it to your friends and rated.
Also subscribe to make sure you're the next episode.
This podcast is presented to you by the free Software Foundation Europe
we are a charity that works on promoting Software Freedom.
If you like our work please consider supporting us with a donation
you find more information under my.fsfe.org slash donate.
I've been looking forward to our next episode and I hope you will
then again listen to us.
Thank you very much.
Here's another voice from our large community.
My name is Florian.
I've been a volunteer with the FSFE since 2012
and I continue volunteering for the FSFE because whenever I have an idea
and I approach someone about it and I say I'm willing to do the work
people actually let me and I find that very motivating.